Ling 567 Lab 2
Qingyang Wang and Qingxia Guo
January 2022

1
Yes

2
After uplodaing our initial choices file, the customization page did not give us
any asterisks, so we were able to download and load the grammar into LKB.

3
Initial Run
The test corpus had 1800 total sentences. We used a condition to filter so that
only sentences with i-length ¡ 10 were processed. We also removed certain sentences manually if they caused tsdb to get stuck. As a result, the total number
of processed sentences was 934.
The total number of items parsed: 147
The average number of parses per parsed item: 22.02
The most ambiguous item: 330 parses
Sources of ambiguity that we noticed: It seems that coordination led to a lot of
ambiguities. For parsed It also seems like there could potentially be compound
verbs, which the LKB tries to coordinate, which leads to further ambiguity.
10 items:
• ala la ta ni
3pl go catch fish
They went and caught fish.
(item 14, or 140, not sure how the numbering system works)
The semantics seem pretty reasonable. We get 2 trees for this sentence,
with an ambiguity in coordination. Looking at the simple MRS, it seemslike the semantics look reasonable. The difference between the two trees
is that in the first tree, the relation for the go relation, has an arg2 value
that is identified with the arg2 value for the catch relation. These arg2
values are also identified with the arg0 value for the fish relation. The
second tree, on the other hand, identifies the arg2 of the catch relation
with the arg0 of the fish relation, but not does identify the arg2 of the go
relation with the above items.
Both trees identify the arg1 value of the go and catch predications with
the arg0 value of the pronoun predication. It seems that the semantics of
the 2nd tree indicate that there is someone who went, and also caught fish,
while the semantics of the 1st tree indicate that there is someone who went
fish, and also caught fish. It seems that the first tree coordinates “go” and
“catch fish” , while the second coordinates “go” and “catch”.
Based on the English translation, we think that the semantics for the first
parse are reasonable. However, it is possible that this is a compound verb
in Titan and thus the second parse is more correct.


• i la i la utue das
3sg go 3sg go fetch sea water
She went and fetched sea water.
(item 286)
The semantics here are not reasonable. It seems that in this sentence, ”i
la” is repeated. This repetition does not appear in other sentences. Looking at where this sentence appears in the reference grammar, it seems that
this is part of a story, so the repetition could possibly be a conversational
artifact or a result of stylistic choice or emphasis.
Upon looking at the 53 parses for this sentence, it seems that none of them
are likely to be reasonable.
We looked at a few parses, and discovered that, in the first parse, the
arg1 of the second go predication is identified with the arg1 of the fetch
predication. However, this item is not identified with the arg1 of the first
go predication, although it should, since there is only one actor in this
sentence.
Additionally, it seems that ’i’ shows up as both a N or a V in the parse
trees. It seems that this is ambiguous between being a personal pronoun
or an auxiliary verb.
We also saw parse trees where 2 verbs seemed to combine via the COMPAUX rule to become a noun, which doesn’t make much sense. The COMPAUX rule seems to not put any constraints on its daughters, which will
be problematic.


• i cariti moat yevuen
3sg cut through snake completely He cut right through Snake
(item 366)
The semantics here look different from what we expected, but reasonable.From the gloss, it seems that yevuen, which means completely, is a modifier that expresses that the act was finished.
The parse is somewhat reasonable. It identifies the arg0 of the pronoun
relation with the arg1 of the cut predication. The arg2 of the cut relation
is identified with the arg0 of the snake relation. The more problematic
part is yevuen, which is coordinated with ”cariti moat”, so the semantics
are more like, ”He cut through Snake and finished”. The arg1 of the cut
predication is identified with the arg1 of the finished predication.


• i tu wai ila alawen
3sg prog grow into tall
It grew into a tall mountain.
(item 395)
The semantics here seem to be missing an important part. This sentence
also had a lot of parses. Some of these parse trees have a top symbol of
N, which immediately rules them out as implausible. We looked at a few
that weren’t like this, that we thought could be reasonable. Interestingly,
the progressive marker seems to be interpreted as a verb, and there were
trees that coordinated tu, wai, and ila. However, ”alawen”, which seems
to mean something like tall or mountain, did not contribute to the semantics at all, which is definitely wrong.
(After this item, I realized that I was writing too much per item).


• i cani nou
3sg count day
She counted the days (item 1282)
The semantics of the only parse look very reasonable. It identifies the
arg1 of the count predication with the arg0 of the pronoun predication,
and the arg2 of the count predication with the arg0 of the day predicatino.
However, there didn’t seem to be a predication for tense.


• moen ramat i ta i
def person 3sg hit 3sg
The man hit him.
(item 1426)
Out of the 3 parses for this sentence, 2 of them have a top symbol of
N, ruling them out instantly. For the other one, there is a strange coordination going on that causes the semantics to not make much sense.


• yo buai
1sg crocodile
I m a crocodile.(item 1613)
The semantics for the only parse generated here do not make sense, because there is a predication for the verb fly. This seems to be because of
a incorreect or ambiguous lexical entry.


• ato ure cu
3pc pour fish broth
They poured the fish broth.
(item 140)
The semantics for the only parse for this sentence look really good, except
that it does not have a tense predication. The semantics correctly identify
the subject with the arg1 of pour, and the object with the arg2.


• ala Yap ala uti kan
3pl Y 3pl set out food
The people from Yap set out food.
(item 1569)
There are 2 parses for this sentence, and neither of them seem to have
reasonable semantics. There is weird coordination, too many redudndant
exist predications, and also there is no ”from” predication or ”Yap” predication.


• i tu ta api
3sg prog collect sago
He was collecting sago.
(item 157)
The semantics for the three parses did not seem very reasonable. One
of them only had one predication. Another one expressed the progressive
as a verb, and there was also coordination. There was a stay relation
where the arg2 was identified with the arg2 of the collect relation, which
was identified with the arg0 of the sago relation.





Run after modification
Total number of items parsed: 147
The average number of parses per parsed item: After modification, the number
of distinct analyses dropped by about an average of 2-3 parses per processed
sentence, but the rest of the numbers were similar to before.
The most ambiguous item: 312 parses
The sources of ambiguity seemed to still be the same, as a lot of the sources ofambiguity were things that we did not address in this lab.
For our test suite, the coverage went from 90 to 100 percent, although definitely
not all of the test suite sentences parsed, or even should parse, so we were a bit
confused about what that means.

• Test suite sentences:
• yo Pamei.
1sg P
’I am Pamei’
(item number 6)
This item should not have parsed since we did not have a rule for be
copula. However, there was another entry for yo, which was a verb that
meant fly. Because of this, the entry parsed. However, the semantics still
only had one predication, the pronoun predication, and there was no name
predication.

• ala manaon ala ciri.
3pl egg 3pl break
’The eggs hatched.’
(item 9)

The semantics for this one also did not make much sense. Because we
did not make the auxiliary verb construction the way it should be, the
second ala in this sentence, which should be an auxiliary for ciri, was
instead forming a constituent wiht manaon. So, there was weird coordination in the semantics, where there shouldn’t have been.

• ato ra.
3pc spring.out
’They sprung out (of the pod)’
(item 1)
The semantics for this were pretty reasonable, identifying the arg0 of the
pronoun predication with the arg1 of the jump predication. However,
jump has an arg2 (that isn’t identified with anything), as it is entered as
a transitive verb, intead of an intransitive.

• yoya nyu.
1pl.incl swim
’We are swiming’
(item 5)
Like the last sentene, the semantics for the only parse for this sentence
correctly identify the arg0 of the pronoun predication with the arg1 of
the swim predication, but swim is incorrectly? entered in the lexicon as a
transitive verb.

• kor i kip.
land 3sg lie
’The land is lying’
(item 3)
The only parse for this item makes no sense, also because we did not
fully implement the auxiliary verb rule, and thus i attached to the noun
on its left first, instead of the verb on its right. As a result, the semantics
involved coordination, and the arg1 of the lie predication was not identified with anything.


Corpus sentences:
• moen Hus i va poa ko me po ca
def Hus 3sg say 2sg.desid 2sg.fut come do what
The man from Hus said What will you do here
This sentence is when that had significantly less distinct parses than before. By modifying the comp-aux rule, we removed the possibility of Vs
combining to become an N. This is also a complicated sentence though,
and the semantics were hard to understand. However, there is still the issue of the auxiliary verb not attaching to the verb, and thus a nonsensical
coordination predication.

• kei i la pein tree 3sg become woman
The tree became a woman.
(item 387)
This sentence also suffers from the auxiliary verb issue. However, since
this sentence is less complicated, it does identify the arg0 of the overall
noun phrase with the arg1 of the become predication, so it makes more
sense.

• ala iri i
3pl bury 3sg
They buried him.
(item 1678)
The semantics for this sentence make sense. It identifies the arg1 of the
bury predication with the predication from the subject pronoun, and identifies the arg2 with the predication from the object pronoun.

• aru ra i vaye i
3dl scramble 3sg accompany 3sg
The two of them scrambled down. He went with her.
(item 1555)
The number of trees for this sentence went down significantly. However,
looking at the new trees, none of them involve a coordination of 2 VPs,
so it seems like they would not make a lot of sense. One of the parse
semantics identified the first subject with the second verb instead of the
first.

• ala ani cinal yevuen
3pl eat devil completely
They ate the devils up.
(item 1792)
The semantics treat completely as a verb with the finished predication,
so it makes some sense. However, finished has an arg2 value that is not
identified with anything.

4/5
Titan has a number feature that is marked on the verb via the use of a clitic
that is homophonous with personal pronouns in Titan.
For example:

kor i kip.land 3sg lie
’The land is lying’

The verb is preceded by the clitic/auxiliary verb ato. Ato is also used as a
personal pronoun in Titan. (it is 3rd person, paucal number in both the auxiliary and pronoun usage).
Titan has number agreement between subject and verb. Number on the subject
is also marked with a specifier on the noun, that is also homophonous with a
pronoun. The number of the subject and verb must match, as in the following
example:

ala manaon ala ciri.
3pl egg 3pl break
’The eggs hatched.’

As contrast, the following is ungrammatical:
ala manaon i ciri.
3pl egg 1sg break
’The eggs hatched.’

However, if the noun is not overtly marked for number, it is considered syntactically singular, even if it is semantically plural. For example:

manaon i ciri.
egg 3sg break
’The egg hatched’
In contrast, the following is ungrammatical:

manaon ala ciri.
egg 3pl break
’The eggs hatched’

It is ungrammatical because the noun manaon, since it is not overtly marked,
is syntactically singular, and thus dose not agree with the verb.
To represent this phenomenon, one change we wanted to make was a change
to the BARE-NP rule. The current BARE-NP rule identifies its own HOOK.INDEX
value with the HOOK.INDEX value of its head-daughter. We wanted to change
it so that the INDEX of the bare-np phrase was identified with the INDEX of
its head daughter for every value EXCEPT for the PNG.number, which would
be sg. However, we weren’t sure how to do this, and if we were supposed to
do this, because it involves editing the matrix file directly, and we weren’t sure
how to format it.


So, in order to improve agreement, we made changes to the number category
of the page. Titan has singular, plural, dual, and paucal. Because the choices
file did not have paucal, we added it. We also specified that there can be a distinction between 1st-person exclusive and inclusive in plural, paucal, and dual
numbers.
This caused an error with the lexicon, as person and number became one category, pernum, instead of 2 separate categories. We changed the noun categories
to have the feature pernum instead of person and number separately.

Another phenomena is that in cases where the subject of the verb would be
a personal pronoun, there is no repetition. In that case, there is only one occurence of the pronoun or auxiliary. For example:
ato ra.
3pc spring.out
’They sprung out (of the pod)’

i la ta ni
3sg go catch fish
’He goes to catch fish’

Compare this with the following ungrammatical example:

i i la ta ni
3sg 3sg go catch fish
’He goes to catch fish’

This example is ungrammatical because i appears twice. Although i can appear both as a subject pronoun and as a number-marking auxiliary verb, it
should not be repeated twice in a row.
We then had to modify the pronouns in the choices file. It turned out that a
lot of the pronouns in the lexicon were in a noun category for 3rd person nouns,
which is incorrect. We created several new categories for pronouns, marked said
categories as personal pronoun categories, and specified the appropriate pernum
value. We also changed some lexical entries. For example, in cases where there
was a homophone between a pronoun and a verb, we put them in different noun
classes so we would hopefully get the correct parse.
We also tried to modify the adnominal possession section, and defined classes
of possessor pronouns. This is because Titan has a class of possessive pronouns,
that resemble the personal pronouns, except with a prefix added. We added
the possessive pronouns as instances for each class. Each possessive pronoun
instance also appeared in the lexicon. However, when we tried to upload the
grammar, lkb gave us an error as it said that the new noun classes we added in
the lexicon had conflicting constraints from its parents. We tried a lot of different ways of categorizing and defining the possessive pronouns in the lexicon sothey wouldn’t conflict with the information in the adnominal possession section,
but we weren’t able to figure it out. In the end, we had to delete the changes
to the adnominal possession section.
Additionally, we decided to modify the comp-aux phrase, and specified that
this phrase is head V. We did this to avoid cases where the comp-aux phrase
had 2 V daughters, but it itself was an N.

6
There is still work to be done on agreement in Titan. Notably, the verb has
a number marker, which is an auxiliary verb that appears to the left of it.
This auxiliary verb is homophonous with personal pronouns. Currently, when
our grammar parses sentences, it does not seem to recognize words with the
same spelling as said pronouns as auxiliaries, and thus the grammar incorrectly
parses the auxiliaries as forming a constituent with the noun. Because we did
not tackle the issue in this lab, this problem is still present.
Aditionally, our test suite has examples of the be copula, for example in item 6,
with a sentence meaning ’I am Pamei’, which we do not have a way to handle
yet.

